# My Malloc #
Project 1 of System Programming (CS214): Luke Letourneau and Joshua Chung-Group 37

## Goals ##
Implement a version of `malloc()` and `free()` in the C programming language. The functions will store data in a global `memory` array. The `free()` function will also contain some warnings that the standard `free()` does not give, like trying to free a pointer twice, freeing a pointer that is not the head of a chunk of data, and trying to free an address not obtained by malloc.


## Meta Tag Implementation ##
In order to maximize the amount of memory available to the user in the memory array, the smallest of data types were used for the meta tag. The `char` data type was used to determine if a meta tag for a chunk was used or freed, since only 1 bit was really needed. The `short int` data type was used to record how many bytes were allocated for the meta tag chunk. Since short can cover up to 32,767 (or 65,535 if unsigned), it is enough for 4096 or any other MEMSIZE up to that number short. In addition, the struct was packed to 1 byte alignment in order to minimize the memory footprint to 3 bytes and leave more memory for the actual user data. 

## Malloc Implementation ##
For `malloc()`, the main structure was a simple linear search for a memory chunk that contained enough bytes to house the user data. Before the loop, the input was checked (user cannot request 0 or less bytes) and the memory was checked to see if it started with a meta tag of chunk size 0. Each byte of the memory is initialized to 0 on the program's start (a requirement of this implementation), so by treating the first 3 bytes as a meta tag we would get that the chunk size is 0. This should never be the case, as that would imply that there is a meta tag pointing to no data and the pointer that matches that tag would be the next meta tag; It would be a mess. Thus, we take this opportunity to make a meta tag that essentially declares the entire memory as free.

After this initialization, we start a search for an adequate chunk of memory for the user. If we come across one that is not free or does not have enough space, we go to the next. If we come across memory that is free and has enough space, we mark it reserved and return a pointer to the start to the user. An edge case of this is if a chunk contains, say, 3 bytes and the user requested 2. This would mean there is one byte of additional space - not enough for a meta tag and data afterwards. In this case we mark the whole chunk as reserved and take the hit of a few "lost" bytes. If there is adequate space though (4 bytes minimum, 3 for header and a minimum 1 for data), we create a new meta tag after the amount of data the user requested. If at any point we exceed the bounds of the memory, we say we cannot fulfill the user's request and return a null pointer and give an error message.

### Testing of Malloc during development ###
To test malloc, a lot of `char` arrays were used, as they are easily viewed for correctness when looking at the output of the `memdump()` testing function, which output the memory byte-by-byte. During the more manual testing (before memgrind) MEMSIZE was lowered to a smaller value, such as 32. With this, char arrays of various sizes were put into the memory. Looking at the output of `memdump()`, it was possible to see that the next meta tag was being placed correctly and that the pointer given by malloc was correct. After the `free()` implementation, it was tested that `malloc()` would slot the users request into the first available (and valid) slot everytime. Also checked was the condition of having a chunk of memory large enough to store a user request but not large enough to store the user request AND at least another byte (+ meta tag).

## Free Implementation ##
For this implementation of `free()`, a simple for loop was used to go through the memory array and determine if the given address is a valid pointer to be freed. If the given parameter is not a valid pointer given by malloc, it will print an error message accordingly. The loop begins from the start of the memory + sizeof(meta) address and advances to the next meta data tag by the current chunk size amount. While going through the loop, it keeps a pointer of the previous, current, and next meta tags to be used later in the coalesce process. In terms of the error message, it will print out in this fashion: "ERROR -type of error at- FILE, LINE". The type of errors it will detect are invalid pointers, null pointers, or possible double free pointers.

### Coalesce upon Free ###
After checking that it is a valid pointer to be freed, free will attempt to coalesce the current meta tag with the previous and next tag. In other words, the only possible areas that could be combined with the current chunk area (which are the spaces in front and behind the memory chunk) are taken into consideration and do not need to be considered to coalesce again. This approach ensures that we take care of all free cases instead of attempting to coalesce in malloc which may have multiple coalesce procedures.

### Test plan for Free during development ###
During the development of `free()`, several additional programs were created to detect if it was freeing the chunk and determine if it was coalescing properly. Within `main2()` in mymalloc.c (originally named `main()` to test during the development phase), `memdump()` was utilized to print out the entire memory space upon each `malloc()` and `free()` calls. `memdump()` will go through the memory char array and individually print out each index. Additionally, during testing, a MEMSIZE of 32 was used to keep the print out as brief as possible while providing a great amount of output for debugging. After each print out, the output was thoroughly reviewed to identify if it was performing as properly. When certain unforeseen errors did arise, a replicate of the problem was tested and the functions were meticulously debugged. For the test plan of determining if `free()` was performing correctly, a pointer ahead of memory, before memory, offset from valid metatag, and NULL were individually tested to determine if the memory stayed consistent with the corresponding calls. For coalesce, multiple pointer orders were tested to see the change in chunk size for the metatag. For example, if 3 memory chunks were in order, a free in the order of (1,2,3), (2,1,3), (2,3,1), (1,3,2), (3,1,2), and (3,2,1) were tested for proper coalesce procedures. During this process, invalid pointers were mixed in between the orders to test inconsistency but the functions reported the corresponding error messages and did not interfere with memory. Finally, normal free calls with the given malloc pointers were tested by using `memdump()` and checking the is_reserved tag in the print out.

## Stress Testing ##
Tests 4 and 5 are of our own design, the first 3 come from assignment's required testing procedure
### Test1 ###
`malloc()` and immediately `free()` a 1-byte chunk, 120 times.
### Test2 ###
Use `malloc()` to get 120 1-byte chunks, storing the pointers in an array, then use `free()` to deallocate the chunks.
### Test3 ###
Randomly allocate a 1-byte chunk and store the pointer in an array or free a recent chunk 120 times
### Test4 ###
Allocating random size byte chunks until failure (running out of availible memory) and freeing the chunks at even then odd location to test coalesce.  
  
For this test, it will test the ability of `malloc()` being able to allocate any given and valid amounts of data until failure and test the ability of `free()` of being able to free pointers generally for the even indexed pointers and follow proper coalesce procedure for the odd indexed pointer. The test will complete by allocating the maximum amount available which is MEMSIZE - sizeof(meta) and freeing that pointer. If the test fails, it means that the free procedure during the odd indexed pointers failed and thus coalesce did not function properly. 
### Test5 ###
Allocating a maximum amount of 1-byte chunks and randomly freeing until the entire memory is empty  
  
For this test, it will test the ability of `malloc()` being able to allocate a maximum amount of 1-byte chunks until failure and test the ability of `free()` of being able to free pointers randomly for the entire memory. The test will complete by allocating the maximum amount available which is MEMSIZE - sizeof(meta) and freeing that pointer. If the test fails, it means that the free procedure of randomly freeing all the pointers failed and that certain edge cases of free were not accounted for. 